The Universe is all of time and space and its contents. The Universe includes
planets, stars, galaxies, the contents of intergalactic space, the smallest
subatomic particles, and all matter and energy. The observable universe is about
28 billion parsecs (91 billion light-years) in diameter at the present time.
The size of the whole Universe is not known and may be either finite or
infinite. Observations and the development of physical theories have led to
inferences about the composition and evolution of the Universe. The Big Bang
theory is the prevailing cosmological model describing the development of the
Universe. Space and time were created in the Big Bang, and these were imbued
with a fixed amount of energy and matter; as space expands, the density of that
matter and energy decreases. After the initial expansion, the Universe cooled
sufficiently to allow the formation first of subatomic particles and later of
simple atoms. Giant clouds of these primordial elements later coalesced through
gravity to form stars. Assuming that the prevailing model is correct, the age of
the Universe is measured to be 13.799Â±0.021 billion years. The more matter there
is in the Universe, the stronger the mutual gravitational pull of the matter. If
the Universe were too dense then it would re-collapse into a gravitational
singularity. However, if the Universe contained too little matter then the
expansion would accelerate too rapidly for planets and planetary systems to
form. Since the Big Bang, the universe has expanded monotonically. Surprisingly,
our universe has just the right mass density of about 5 protons per cubic meter
which has allowed it to expand for the last 13.8 billion years, giving time to
form the universe as observed today.
